The Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 2202: Simple
Plumbing for the Home, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 2202: Simple Plumbing for the Home

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 28, 2019 [EBook #59381]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE PLUMBING FOR THE HOME ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas compiled from images made available
by The Internet Archive.









Transcribers Note

Text emphasis denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=.




SIMPLE PLUMBING REPAIRS

for the Home and Farmstead


[Illustration]

[Illustration]


Farmers' Bulletin No. 2202

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




CONTENTS


                                         Page

  Repairing water faucets and valves        1
  Frostproof hydrants                       4
  Repairing leaks in pipes and tanks        5
    Pipes                                   5
    Tanks                                   7
  Water hammer                              8
  Frozen water pipes                        8
    Preventing freezing                     8
    Thawing                                 8
  Repairing water closets                   9
    Flushing mechanism                      9
    Bowl removal                           10
    Tank "sweating"                        12
  Clearing clogged drains                  12
    Fixture and floor drains               12
    Outside drains                         13
  Tools and spare parts                    13
  Emergencies                              14


=Prepared by

Northeastern Region

Agricultural Research Service=



This bulletin supersedes Farmers' Bulletin 1460, "Simple Plumbing
Repairs in the Home."


=Washington, D.C.=

=Revised December 1972=

=For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government
Printing: Office, Washington, D.C. 20402 - Price 15 cents Stock Number
0100-02684=




SIMPLE PLUMBING REPAIRS

for the Home and Farmstead



You can save money and avoid delays by making minor plumbing repairs
yourself.

Jobs that a farmer or homeowner can do with a few basic tools include:

  Repairing water faucets and valves.

  Repairing leaks in pipes and tanks.

  Thawing frozen pipes.

  Repairing water closets.

  Cleaning clogged drains.

Extensive plumbing repairs or alterations in the plumbing system
usually require authorization from local authorities and possibly
inspection of the completed work. Therefore such work should be done by
a qualified or licensed plumber.



REPAIRING WATER FAUCETS AND VALVES

Faucets and globe valves, the type of shutoff valves commonly used
in home water systems, are very similar in construction (fig. 1) and
repair instructions given below apply to both. Your faucets or valves
may differ somewhat in general design from the one shown in figure 1,
because both faucets and valves come in a wide variety of styles.

Mixing faucets, which are found on sinks, laundry trays, and bathtubs,
are actually two separate units with a common spout. Each unit is
independently repaired.

Dripping faucets are the most common plumbing problem. Normally a new
washer is all that is required. If water leaks around the stem, either
the packing is loose or needs replacing. To repair the faucet, first
shut off the water at the shutoff valve nearest the particular faucet.

Disassemble the faucet by removing the handle, packing nut, packing,
and stem in that order. You may have to set the handle back on the stem
and use it to unscrew and remove the stem.

Remove the screw and worn washer from the stem. Clean the washer cup
and install a new washer of the proper size and type.

Reassemble the faucet. Handles of mixing faucets should be in matched
positions.

If a washer requires frequent replacement, it may be the wrong type or
the seat may be rough and scoring the washer. Flat washers are used
on seats having a crown or round ridge for the washer seat. Tapered
or rounded washers are used with tapered seats. These seats may be
replaced if worn or damaged.

Replaceable seats have either a square or hex shaped water passage
for the seat removal tool. Seat dressing tools are available for
non-replaceable seats.

Occasionally a faucet will be noisy when water is flowing. This may
be due to a loose washer or worn threads on the stem and receiver,
permitting the stem to vibrate or chatter. Pressing down on the handle
will stop stem vibration but will not affect a loose washer.

[Illustration: _Figure 1._--Globe type angle valve. Faucets are similar
in construction.]

Replacement stems are available; however, if the receiving threads are
worn excessively a new stem would not eliminate the problem completely.
In some faucets it is possible to replace the stem receiver, the stem,
and the seat, thus restoring all normal wearing parts within the faucet.

Several new faucet designs aimed at easier operation, eliminating drip,
and promoting long service life, are on the market. Instructions for
repair may be obtained from dealers.

If a shower head drips, the supply valve has not been fully closed, or
the valve needs repair.

After extended use and several repairs, some valves will no longer give
tight shutoff and must be replaced. When this becomes necessary, it
may be advisable to upgrade the quality with equipment having better
flow characteristics and longer-life design and materials. In some
cases, ball valves will deliver more water than globe valves. Some
globe valves deliver more flow than others for identical pipe sizes.
Y-pattern globe valves, in straight runs of pipe, have better flow
characteristics than straight stop valves. Figure 2 shows the features
of different types of valves.

[Illustration: _Figure 2._--Different types of valves: _A_, Glove
valve; note large passages of water. _B_, Y-pattern globe valve; the
flow is almost straight. _C_, Ball valve, straight flow; some makes are
available with the port in the ball the same diameter as the pipe.]


PRECAUTIONS


Polluted water or sewage may carry such diseases as typhoid fever and
amoebic dysentery. If you do your own plumbing work, be sure that--

  There are no leaks in drainpipes through which sewage or sewage gases
    can escape.

  There are no cross connections between piping carrying water from
    different sources unless there can be reasonable certainty that all
    sources are safe and will remain safe.

  There can be no back siphonage of water from plumbing fixtures or
    other containers into the water-supply system.

Once a pipe has become polluted, it may be difficult to free it of
the pollution. For this reason, building codes do not permit the use
of second-hand pipe. All initial piping and parts and subsequent
replacements should be new.

Since a plumbing system will require service from time to time,
shutoff valves should be installed at strategic locations so that
an affected portion can be isolated (water flow to it cut off) with
minimum disturbance to service in the rest of the system. Shutoff
valves are usually provided on the water closet supply line, on the
hot- and cold-water supply line to each sink, tub, and lavatory, and on
the water heater supply line. Drain valves are usually installed for
water-supply piping systems and for hot-water storage tanks.

A pressure-relief valve should be installed for the water heater
storage tank to relieve pressure buildup in case of overheating.

[Illustration: _Figure 3._--Frostproof hydrant; _A_, Closed; _B_,
opened. As soon as the hydrant is closed, water left in the riser
drains out the drain tube as shown in _A_. This prevents water from
freezing in the hydrant in cold weather.]




FROSTPROOF HYDRANTS


Frostproof hydrants are basically faucets, although they may differ
somewhat in design from ordinary faucets.

Two important features of a frostproof hydrant are: (1) The valve is
installed under ground--below the frostline--to prevent freezing, and
(2) the valve is designed to drain the water from the hydrant when the
valve is closed.

Figure 3 shows one type of frostproof hydrant. It works as follows:
When the handle is raised, the piston rises, opening the valve. Water
flows from the supply pipe into the cylinder, up through the riser,
and out the spout. When the handle is pushed down, the piston goes
down, closing the valve and stopping the flow of water. Water left in
the hydrant flows out the drain tube into a small gravel-filled dry
well or drain pit.

[Illustration: _Figure 4._--Vacuum breaker arrangement for outside hose
hydrant.]

As with ordinary faucets, leakage will probably be the most common
trouble encountered with frostproof hydrants. Worn packing, gaskets,
and washers can cause leakage. Disassemble the hydrant as necessary to
replace or repair these and other parts.

Frostproof yard hydrants having buried drains can be health hazards.
The vacuum created by water flowing from the hydrant may draw in
contaminated water standing above the hydrant drain level. Such
hydrants should be used only where positive drainage can be provided.

Frostproof wall hydrants (fig. 4) are the preferred type. For servicing
sprayers using hazardous chemicals, hydrants having backflow protection
should be used (fig. 5).




REPAIRING LEAKS IN PIPES AND TANKS


Pipes

Leaks in pipes usually result from corrosion or from damage to the
pipe. Pipes may be damaged by freezing, by vibration caused by
machinery operating nearby, by water hammer, or by animals bumping into
the pipe. (Water hammer is discussed on P. 8)

[Illustration: _Figure 5._--Protected wall hydrant suitable for filling
agricultural sprayers.]

_Corrosion_

Occasionally waters are encountered that corrode metal pipe and tubing.
(Some acid soils also corrode metal pipe and tubing.)

The corrosion usually occurs, in varying degrees, along the entire
length of pipe rather than at some particular point. An exception would
be where dissimilar metals, such as copper and steel, are joined.

Treatment of the water may solve the problem of corrosion.[1]
Otherwise, you may have to replace the piping with a type made of
material that will be less subject to the corrosive action of the water.

[Footnote 1: For information about water treatment, see FB 2248,
"Treating Farmstead and Rural Home Water Systems." You can get a
free copy from your county agricultural agent or write the Office of
Information, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250.
Include your ZIP Code in your return address.]

It is good practice to get a chemical analysis of the water before
selecting materials for a plumbing system. Your State college or
university may be equipped to make an analysis; if not, you can have it
done by a private laboratory.

_Repairing Leaks_

Pipes that are split by hard freezing must be replaced.

A leak at a threaded connection can often be stopped by unscrewing the
fitting and applying a pipe joint compound that will seal the joint
when the fitting is screwed back together.

Small leaks in a pipe can often be repaired with a rubber patch and
metal clamp or sleeve. This must be considered as an emergency repair
job and should be followed by permanent repair as soon as practicable.

Large leaks in a pipe may require cutting out the damaged section and
installing a new piece of pipe. At least one union will be required
unless the leak is near the end of the pipe. You can make a temporary
repair with plastic or rubber tubing. The tubing must be strong enough
to withstand the normal water pressure in the pipe. It should be
slipped over the open ends of the piping and fastened with pipe clamps
or several turns of wire.

Vibration sometimes breaks solder joints in copper tubing, causing
leaks. If the joint is accessible, clean and resolder it. The tubing
must be dry before it can be heated to soldering temperature. Leaks in
places not readily accessible usually require the services of a plumber
and sometimes of both a plumber and a carpenter.


Tanks

Leaks in tanks are usually caused by corrosion. Sometimes, a safety
valve may fail to open and the pressure developed will spring a leak.

While a leak may occur at only one place in the tank wall, the wall may
also be corroded thin in other places. Therefore, any repair should be
considered as temporary, and the tank should be replaced as soon as
possible.

A leak can be temporarily repaired with a toggle bolt, rubber gasket,
and brass washer, as shown in figure 6. You may have to drill or ream
the hole larger to insert the toggle bolt. Draw the bolt up tight to
compress the rubber gasket against the tank wall.

[Illustration: _Figure 6._--Closing a hole in a tank: _A_, The link
of the toggle bolt is passed through the hole in the tank (hole is
enlarged if necessary). _B_, Side view of tank edge (nut is drawn up
tightly to compress washer and gasket against tank). _C_, Outside view
of completed repair.]




WATER HAMMER


Water hammer sometimes occurs when a faucet is suddenly closed. When
the flow of water is suddenly stopped, its kinetic energy is expended
against the walls of the piping. This causes the piping to vibrate, and
leaks or other damage may result.

Water hammer may be prevented or its severity reduced by installing an
air chamber just ahead of the faucet. The air chamber may be a piece of
air-filled pipe or tubing, about 2 feet long, extending vertically from
the pipe. It must be airtight. Commercial devices designed to prevent
water hammer are also available.

An air chamber requires occasional replenishing of the air to prevent
it from becoming water-logged--that is, full of water instead of air.

A properly operating hydropneumatic tank, such as the type used in
individual water systems, serves as an air chamber, preventing or
reducing water hammer.




FROZEN WATER PIPES


In cold weather, water may freeze in underground pipes laid above the
frostline or in pipes in unheated buildings, in open crawl spaces under
buildings, or in outside walls.

When water freezes it expands. Unless a pipe can also expand, it may
rupture when the water freezes. Iron pipe and steel pipe do not expand
appreciably. Copper pipe will stretch some, but does not resume its
original dimensions when thawed out; repeated freezings will cause it
to fail eventually. Flexible plastic tubing can stand repeated freezes,
but it is good practice to prevent it from freezing.


Preventing Freezing

Pipes may be insulated to prevent freezing, but this is not a
completely dependable method. Insulation does not stop the loss of heat
from the pipe--merely slows it down--and the water may freeze if it
stands in the pipe long enough at below-freezing temperature. Also, if
the insulation becomes wet, it may lose its effectiveness.

Electric heating cable can be used to prevent pipes from freezing. The
cable should be wrapped around the pipe and covered with insulation.


Thawing

Use of electric heating cable is a good method of thawing frozen pipe,
because the entire heated length of the pipe is thawed at one time.

Thawing pipe with a blowtorch can be dangerous. The water may get hot
enough at the point where the torch is applied to generate sufficient
steam under pressure to rupture the pipe. Steam from the break could
severely scald you.

Thawing pipe with hot water is safer than thawing with a blowtorch.
One method is to cover the pipe with rags and then pour the hot water
over the rags.

When thawing pipe with a blowtorch, hot water, or similar methods, open
a faucet and start thawing at that point. The open faucet will permit
steam to escape, thus reducing the chance of the buildup of dangerous
pressure. Do not allow the steam to condense and refreeze before it
reaches the faucet.

Underground metal pipes can be thawed by passing a low-voltage electric
current through them. The current will heat the entire length of pipe
through which it passes. Both ends of the pipe must be open to prevent
the buildup of steam pressure.

CAUTION: This method of thawing frozen pipe can be dangerous and should
be done by an experienced person only. It cannot be used to thaw
plastic tubing or other non-electricity-conducting pipe or tubing.




REPAIRING WATER CLOSETS


Water closets (commonly called toilets) vary in general design and in
the design of the flushing mechanism. But they are enough alike that
general repair instructions can suffice for all designs.


Flushing Mechanism

Figure 7 shows a common type of flushing mechanism. Parts that usually
require repair are the flush valve, the intake (float) valve, and the
float ball.

In areas of corrosive water, the usual copper flushing mechanism may
deteriorate in a comparatively short time. In such cases, it may be
advisable to replace the corroded parts with plastic parts. You can
even buy plastic float balls.

_Flush Valve_

The rubber ball of the flush valve may get soft or out of shape and
fail to seat properly. This causes the valve to leak. Unscrew the ball
from the lift wire and install a new one.

The trip lever or lift wire may corrode and fail to work smoothly,
or the lift wire may bind in the guides. Disassemble and clean off
corrosion or replace parts as necessary.

Most plumbing codes require a cutoff valve in the supply line to the
flush tank, which makes it unnecessary to close down the whole system
(fig. 7). If this valve was not installed, you can stop the flow of
water by propping up the float with a piece of wood. Be careful not to
bend the float rod out of alignment.

_Intake (Float) Valve_

A worn plunger washer in the supply valve will cause the valve to leak.
To replace the washer--

  Shut off the water and drain the tank.

  Unscrew the two thumb-screws that hold the levers and push out the
    levers.

  Lift out the plunger, unscrew the cup on the bottom, and insert a new
    washer. The washer is made of material such as rubber or leather.

  Examine the washer seat. If nicked or rough, it may need refacing.

If the float-valve assembly is badly corroded, replace it.

[Illustration: _Figure 7._--Water closet (toilet) flush tank.]

_Float Ball_

The float ball may develop a leak and fail to rise to the proper
position. (Correct water level is about 1 inch below the top of the
overflow tube or enough to give a good flush.) If the ball fails to
rise, the intake valve will remain open and water will continue to
flow. Brass float balls can sometimes be drained and the leak soldered.
Other types must be replaced. When working on the float ball, be
careful to keep the rod aliened so that the ball will float freely and
close the valve properly.


Bowl Removal

An obstruction in the water closet trap or leakage around the bottom
of the water-closet bowl may require removal of the bowl. Follow this
procedure:

  Shut off the water.

  Empty the tank and bowl by siphoning or sponging out the water.

  Disconnect the water pipes to the tank (see fig. 7).

  Disconnect the tank from the bowl if the water closet is a two-piece
    unit. Set the tank where it cannot be damaged. Handle tank and bowl
    carefully; they are made of vitreous china or porcelain and are
    easily chipped or broken.

  Remove the seat and cover from the bowl.

  Carefully pry loose the bolt covers and remove the bolts holding the
    bowl to the floor flange (fig. 8). Jar the bowl enough to break the
    seal at the bottom. Set the bowl upside down on something that will
    not chip or break it.

  Remove the obstruction from the discharge opening.

  Place a new wax seal around the bowl horn and press it into
    place. A wax seal (or gasket) may be obtained from hardware or
    plumbing-supply stores.

  Set the bowl in place and press it down firmly. Install the bolts
    that hold it to the floor flange. Draw the bolts up snugly, but not
    too tight because the bowl may break. The bowl must be level. Keep
    a carpenter's level on it while drawing up the bolts. If the house
    has settled, leaving the floor sloping, it may be necessary to use
    shims to make the bowl set level. Replace the bolt covers.

  Install the tank and connect the water pipes to it. It is advisable
    to replace all gaskets, after first cleaning the surfaces
    thoroughly.

  Test for leaks by flushing a few times.

  Install the seat and cover.

[Illustration: _Figure 8._--Connection of water closet to floor and
soil pipe.]

Tank "Sweating"

When cold water enters a water closet tank, it may chill the tank
enough to cause "sweating" (condensation of atmospheric moisture on the
outer surface of the tank). This can be prevented by insulating the
tank to keep the temperature of the outer surface above the dew point
temperature of surrounding air. Insulating jackets or liners that fit
inside water-closet tanks and serve to keep the outer surface warm are
available from plumbing-supply dealers.




CLEARING CLOGGED DRAINS


Drains may become clogged by objects dropped into them or by
accumulations of grease, dirt, or other matter.


Fixture and Floor Drains

If the obstruction is in a fixture trap, usually the trap can be
removed and cleared. If the obstruction is elsewhere in the pipe other
means must be used.

Cleanout augers--long, flexible, steel cables commonly called
"snakes"--may be run down drainpipes to break up obstructions or to
hook onto and pull out objects. Augers are made in various lengths and
diameters and are available at hardware and plumbing-supply stores. (In
some cases, you may have to call a plumber, who will probably have a
power-driven auger.)

Small obstructions can sometimes be forced down or drawn up by use of
an ordinary rubber force cup (plunger or "plumber's friend").

Grease and soap clinging to a pipe can sometimes be removed by flushing
with hot water. Lye or lye mixed with a small amount of aluminum
shavings may also be used. When water is added to the mixture, the
violent gas-forming reaction and production of heat that takes place
loosens the grease and soap so that they can be flushed away. Use cold
water only. Chemical cleaners should not be used in pipes that are
completely stopped up, because they must be brought into direct contact
with the stoppage to be effective. Handle the material with extreme
care and follow directions on the container. If lye spills on the hands
or clothing, wash with cold water immediately. If any gets into the
eyes, flush with cold water and call a doctor.

Sand, dirt, or clothing lint sometimes clogs floor drains. Remove the
strainer and ladle out as much of the sediment as possible. You may
have to carefully chip away the concrete around the strainer to free
it. Flush the drain with clean water.

When drains have become partially clogged due to lack of water to
transport all solids through them, large buckets or other containers
should be used to flush them. Water should be poured fast enough to
nearly fill the drain.

Occasional flushing of floor drains may prevent clogging.

=CAUTION: Augers, rubber force cups, and other tools used in direct
contact with sewage are subject to contamination. Do not later use them
for work on your potable water supply system unless they have been
properly sterilized.=


Outside Drains

Roots growing through cracks or defective joints sometimes clog outside
drains or sewers. You can clear the stoppage temporarily by using a
root-cutting tool. However, to prevent future trouble, you should
re-lay the defective portion of the line, using sound pipe and making
sure that all joints are watertight.[2]

[Footnote 2: For information on laying sewers, see Agriculture
Information Bulletin 274, "Farmstead Sewage and Refuse Disposal."
For a free copy, send a post card to the Office of Information, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250. Include your ZIP
Code in your return address.]

If possible, sewer lines should be laid out of the reach of roots. But
if this is impossible or impracticable, consider using impregnated
fiber pipe which tends to repel roots.




TOOLS AND SPARE PARTS


Basic tools that you should have on hand to make simple plumbing
repairs include:

  Wrenches, including pipe wrenches, in a range of sizes to fit the
    pipe, fittings, fixtures, equipment, and appliances in the system.

  Screwdrivers in a range of sizes to fit the faucets, valves, and
    other parts of the system.

  Ball peen hammer or a 12- or 16-ounce clawhammer.

  Rubber force cup (plunger or "plumber's friend").

  Cold chisel and center punch.

  Cleanout auger ("snake").

  Friction tape.

  Adjustable pliers.

Additional tools required for more extensive plumbing repairs include:

  Pipe vise.

  Set of pipe threading dies and stocks.

  Hacksaw and blades (blades should have 32 teeth per inch).

  Pipe cutter, roller type.

  Tapered reamer or half-round file.

  Carpenter's brace.

  Set of wood bits.

  Gasoline blowtorch.

  Lead pot and ladle.

  Calking tools.

  Copper tube cutter with reamer (if you have copper tubing).

Always use the proper size wrench or screwdriver. Do not use pipe
wrenches on nuts with flat surfaces; use an adjustable or open-end
wrench. Do not use pipe wrenches on polished-surface tubings or
fittings, such as found on plumbing fixtures; use a strap wrench. Tight
nuts or fittings can sometimes be loosened by tapping lightly with a
hammer or mallet.

It should not be necessary to stock a large number of spare parts. Past
plumbing troubles may give some indication as to the kind of parts most
likely to be needed. Spare parts should include:

 Faucet washers and packing.

 One or two lengths of the most common type and size of piping in the
 plumbing system.

 Several unions and gaskets or unions with ground surfaces.

 Several couplings and elbows.

 A few feet of pipe strap.

 An extra hose connection.




EMERGENCIES


Grouped below are emergencies that may occur and the action to take.
The name, address, and phone number of a plumber who offers 24-hour
service should be posted in a conspicuous place.

_Burst pipe or tank._--Immediately cut off the flow of water by closing
the shutoff valve nearest to the break. Then arrange for repair.

_Water closet overflow._--Do not use water closet until back in working
order. Check for and remove stoppage in closet bowl outlet, drain line
from closet to sewer, or sewer or septic tank. If stoppage is due to
root entry into pipe, repair of pipe at that point is recommended.

_Rumbling noise in hot water tank._--This is likely a sign of
overheating which could lead to the development of explosive pressure
(Another indication of overheating is hot water backing up in the
cold-water supply pipe.) Cut off the burner immediately. Be sure that
the pressure-relief valve is operative. Then check (with a thermometer)
the temperature of the water at the nearest outlet. If above that
for which the gage is set, check the thermostat that controls burner
cutoff. If you cannot correct the trouble, call a plumber.

_Cold house._--If the heating system fails (or if you close the house
and turn off the heat) when there is a chance of subfreezing weather,
completely drain the plumbing system. A drain valve is usually provided
at the low point of the water supply piping for this purpose. A pump,
storage tank, hot-water tank, water closet tank, water-treatment
apparatus, and other water-system appliances or accessories should also
be drained. Put antifreeze in all fixture and drain traps.

Hot-water and steam heating systems should also be drained when the
house temperature may drop below freezing.


U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1972 O-478-903


Transcriber Note

Produced from material made available from the Internet Archive
and is placed in the Public Domain.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 2202:
Simple Plumbing for the Home, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE PLUMBING FOR THE HOME ***

***** This file should be named 59381.txt or 59381.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/3/8/59381/

Produced by Tom Cosmas compiled from images made available
by The Internet Archive.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

